---
layout: post
title:  "Work Update"
date:   2017-07-28
tags: [ update ]
intro: >
  I'm probably wrapping up one of the most stressful and disappointing work assignments I've ever had in the work force. I'd like to document what my experience has been this past year in the hopes that those finding themselves in similar situations can find some comfort that they are not alone.
published: true
---
{{page.intro}}

## My Work Environment

I started at my current assignment by accepting a conversion from contractor to full-time employee back in August of last year. One of the benefits offered to me was a signing bonus contingent upon my staying with the company for one year. At the time, I was thankful, but in retrospect I now realize that I should've placed more value on my freedom.

This has been a rough assignment for me for many reasons, but right now I'm engaged in an epic battle to actually utilize the skills I have. You might think that I'm being overworked, or given impossible deadlines. Quite the opposite is true, and this is precisely what has been so difficult for me. I am currently being starved by my workplace for projects that align with my current skill set and goals. I go home at the end of every day exhausted. Instead of having a steady flow of features, user stories, and bug fixes that allow me to fall into a routine and help make the time pass in a bearable manner, I almost never know what's coming next in the environment I work in. A lot of the time, I have nothing assigned to me, forcing me to strategically plan breaks that take me out of the office so I can kill some time and keep from going crazy. I usually intersperse the work day with frequent periods of activity, like getting up and stretching or going for a walk. In this environment, these are necessary coping mechanisms, and the goal is basically to get me away from staring at my monitor. In spite of a good diet and regular exercise, I bring a lot of frustration home with me in my attempt to work out what is going on in my life and why people are behaving the way they are towards me. It keeps me up at night, and makes me groggy and ill-tempered the next day. I have to admit that this is a source of shame for me, and to my family, I am sorry.

I emphasize that my workplace is at a publicly owned company, and you would imagine there would be better oversight to ensure each employee is being utilized to the best of their abilities. However, I feel that it is the influence of individuals that matter the most. They can literally make you, or in another case, break you, and there is nothing you can do about it. About a month ago I wrote a memo to my direct supervisor and his manager, where I expressed concern that I regularly did not have anything to work on and didn't feel like a part of the team. I felt my skills as a developer beginning to languish, and noticed that others on my team did have projects they were working contemporaneous to me being clueless on what I was supposed to be doing. In the memo, I made several suggestions to them about how to improve transparency and ensure that everyone on the team was getting used; from having a visible Kanban board, to at least tracking user stories[^1]  with some type of project management system. I felt that my memo was articulate, polite, and expressive. My suggestions were not novel, they were practices that were being employed by the two previous teams I had worked on, and were all concerned with transparency. I had a few brief (hurried may be a better term) meetings with them, and somehow they concluded the matter was closed. Even though my concerns were not addressed (effectively sanctioning that employees would be paid for doing nothing) I respect the chain of management and so left the last word to those with more responsibility.

Since then, I've been excluded from meetings for new upcoming projects. My team doesn't really talk to me anymore, and I get this weird vibe whenever I'm in the office. People sort of pretend that I'm not there. It's a very disheartening dynamic. We all sit at these open tables within feet of one another[^2], so you are basically forced to hear and see what is going on around you because it's literally in your face. I can't help but hear when new projects are starting up based on the conversations around me, so I can't rationalize the impedance mismatch. Still, my team finds a way to be sneaky and exclude me from participating in meetings. One morning, I came in and noticed they were rallying together for a meeting. I checked my calendar and noticed I didn't have an invite, so I turned around and asked them if I was missing a meeting I needed to be at. The reply was something to the effect of "Well I don't know, I just saw the invite on my calendar". Then everyone just sort of shuffled off, carefully avoiding eye contact with me. It's clear that a conscious decision was made to keep me off the invite list.

I don't blame them. I am coming to realize that they are at risk of the same type of alienation that I'm now experiencing. But this is still one of the great mysteries of life to me. Why do people act this way instead of standing up for their own individualism? In my mind, I would never think of excluding someone from a meeting[^3]. If by some unfortunate turn of events, I had been saddled with supervisory responsibilities, I would never in my right mind think of excluding an individual. No matter what my personal feelings about them are, if they are productive and get the job done, I would feel it my duty to usher them along and facilitate their development as an employee. I feel this way not only because it is the type of person I feel I should be, but also because I know that my role at any company doesn't give me a reason to treat it like a personal fiefdom. I would consider my role to be to provide organization and stability to my team, and not sow discord. The idea is to be part of something larger. Instead of having a feeling of security and routine, I feel like any day I could be out of work, either due to an inability to hack my current situation or because of a personal vendetta someone with a little influence has against me that makes the work day untenable by depriving me of a work stream. I can only attribute this to a lack of leadership.

## Invalidation

In IT, I have noticed a certain pattern that I know for certain is not exclusive to IT, but takes on a certain flavor in the context of the great unknown and constantly changing ocean of technology. People, because of their influence, are able to control the reality of what people with little technical knowledge see and know about you as a developer. I feel very strongly that what I'm experiencing now is a form of *invalidation*. When this is happening, the skills and actual contributions you can point to simply do not matter[^4] because the conversation is being controlled. In my workplace, we do not have code reviews in any form, and as I hinted above, we do not even track projects or user stories. There are no demos, meet ups, or presentations of any kind. On my team, we don't even have a daily standup and when I approach people to talk about code or ask a question, I always feel that they are reluctant to talk to me and just want to get back to their own work. I haven't met anyone in this job that matches my enthusiasm for problem solving and coding. This puts the knowledge of who is skilled in what firmly in the realm of personality and hearsay, and hence makes it malleable for purposes of exploitation.

Case in point, I consider myself a full stack developer. This means I have the skills to develop a complete and working web application, end-to-end, myself. I work with Java, Spring, and NodeJS. I also leverage technologies like MongoDB, Redis, and RabbitMQ daily. I am adept and proficient at HTML, Javascript, JQuery, and Angular for web development. I regularly keep my skills up-to-date by working on my own applications, reading books, and taking courses online. This reflects the fact that I am almost completely self-taught as a programmer. I can usually be put anywhere on the stack and work effectively, so I find it hard to imagine that I can't be made use of. I also feel that one of my key skills is the ability to communicate in simple and easy to understand terms. I try to communicate in the way that I would like to receive the information, avoiding pretense, using my prior experiences communicating with people whose work requires a great deal of abstraction and intellect as a guide. In previous jobs, after a period of getting my feet wet, I am usually asked to give regular presentations and have been praised on many occasions for my adeptness at presenting complex topics, both in verbal and written forms. Dejectedly, I feel like in this job none of what I've just described matters. I have in many ways passively enjoyed and flourished in environments where great ideas and communication were the norm, and may have limited experience in actively fostering this environment against the current.

Situations like this had an easy answer when I was single, but I have a family I have to consider now. My wife also works full time, so we are completely reliant on day care which is a large chunk of our income. I have to make sure that I have a constant source of income, but I also have to make sure that I'm enthusiastic and actually like what I'm doing. I don't believe that I'm required to go through some hazing period or am condemned to work a job I don't like just because generations before have done it. It is common for me to think about jumping ship, staying onboard but looking elsewhere, or just quitting and moving to Cozumel, all in a single moment of reverie. It's a tough balancing act, but ultimately I'm responsible for my own destiny in life.

### My Advice

If you are going through what I'm describing above, hopefully what you've read gives you a sense that you are not alone, and that there are others who share your experience. This is turning out to be a  pretty dismal experience for me, but I know I can't be alone. I don't know where I'll actually end up a month from now, but I've learned a great deal about the kind of person I want to be.

Anyway, here's a working list of my coping mechanisms for dealing with an unhealthy workplace:

1. Document, Document, Document!

   Take notes about what is going on around you. Blog about it. Just the act of writing helps me organize my thoughts and gives me a sense of control over my environment.

2. Direct Your Effort Elsewhere

   Find another project to work on, even if you have to create it yourself. You can do things the way you want. Remember, you are ultimately responsible for the skills you have. Don't let people trick you into thinking that just because it's not 'enterprise' or 'production', that it's not worth doing. My current goal is to write a different Angular 2 application every week for the next 10 weeks. I probably won't be inventing the next hot social app at that rate, but I'm doing it for the experience anyway. I just wrapped up a diary application, and am starting a Kanban board app using the HTML5 drag and drop API, because "hey, I could use that!" popped in to my mind. It's not important that your initial ideas are hit successes. Rather, it's more important that you tap into your stream of creativity by doing.

   Create your own consulting business. In my opinion, we need more of these run by strong independently-minded developers.

3. Actively Search for Other Jobs

   It's tricky, but you have to find a way to search for another job while you are actively employed. You may have to face the fact that you're not going to make any progress with your employer. Respectfully, schedule interviews and phone calls during your breaks. Make a goal to apply for several jobs per day. When you find another job, give your employer the two week notice if you can. Think of your job in terms of it being a project instead of a career. When the natural workflow has stopped, it may mean your project is complete and you're ready for the next challenge.

4. Exercise

   I'm not the expert on this one, but I have felt the effects of exercising firsthand, and know that it works. I find a run or a brisk walk on the treadmill right in the afternoons when I'm apt to feel the most stress to be extremely beneficial.

5. Get Outdoors

   Most people overlook this, but your body actually needs sunshine to produce Vitamin D. Vitamin D is [essential](http://www.webmd.com/diet/guide/vitamin-d-deficiency) for bone health, and plays a role in managing [stress and anxiety](https://www.healthspan.co.uk/advice/what-vitamin-d-can-do-about-stress-and-anxiety-in-sport). As developers, we work indoors at our computers for most of the day, so we are prone to Vitamin D deficiency. I make it a point to get at least 20 minutes of sunshine a day, and there's plenty of it in Texas during the Summer.

6. Avoid Alcohol

   I'm raising this point here because I feel that in times of high stress, alcohol can just add fuel to the fire and complicate matters. When I'm stressed about work, it doesn't have the relaxing effect I desire, but rather seems to make me drowsy. Even when I do have it, I limit myself to one or two beers. People don't write about this issue enough, and when they do, it is often glamorized in an unrealistic manner. I find that I have to have my wits about me when I'm programming, and If I'm not programming I'm a husband and dad, so need to rely on a different set of wits. The reality of adult life is that you often have to forsake alcohol because you are responsible for others in one way or another, and need the ability to make careful decisions.

**Notes**

[^1]: If I recall, I purposefully used the term 'work effort' in actuality to avoid 'user story', which I detect is a loaded term if you're not into agile.
[^2]: There are no cubicles in this office and almost no private space to gather thoughts.
[^3]: Just for context, we're a small team with 4 developers.
[^4]: This is more than likely accompanied by the lack of tracking and documentation I've already alluded to.
