---
layout: post
title:  "An Update"
date:   2018-10-16
tags: update jekyll nodejs
intro: Howdy folks! I've been quite busy the past few months, and I've unfortunately had to neglect this blog. I just want to let any readers I have out there know that this is still one of my active projects, update on my status, and talk about future plans.
published: true
---
{{page.intro}}

## Please Excuse the Noise

So the first order of business is about this blog. I feel like it's time for an overhaul. While [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) and [Github](https://pages.github.com/) pages have been good to me and a great platform to get started, I sort of feel constrained by the static site realm. For example, I would like to add search and I'm not sure how to accomplish this without bringing in some Javascript at the least. A database backend and REST API would be a minimum if I were doing a feature like this for a client.

Also, I feel a little exposed every time I have to figure out how to do something in Jekyll. While you're not directly accountable for knowing Ruby when creating content with Jekyll, with my level of knowledge I'm totally dependent on the docs. Jekyll has been fun and a joy to use. I may stick with it...I don't know. I do know it was spot on to pick it up in the first place and put all of my content in markdown. Any tool I migrate to will be able to parse and render markdown, so I don't lose anything. I'm sort of reaping one of the main benefits promised by Jekyll's creator, [Tom Preston-Werner](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BMve1OCKj6M).

Whether I stay with Jekyll or move to something else, I will definitely be overhauling the look and feel. Stay tuned for that and don't be surprised if I accidentally convert everything to 30pt Gothic font and splash a cat gif on the landing page.

And lastly, I may end up using a domain I own, drive2code.com, for this blog and various and sundry internet routing. If that happens, I will put up a notice and try my best to set up the appropriate redirection.

## The Obligatory

For the better part of this year, I've been working as a Spring developer focusing on writing REST APIs with Spring Cloud and deploying into Pivotal's Cloud Foundry. I was actually just starting to scratch my head over Spring 5 and Project Reactor. That situation has recently changed, and I will henceforth be programming in [NodeJS](https://nodejs.org) for the indefinite future. I'm really excited about the change, and should be posting some NodeJS articles soon.

## The Future

Well, I've really enjoyed YouTube as a place to share ideas. I wouldn't mind setting up my own channel...

The issues, as with this blog, are time and content. I need to level up a little on how to spend energy and time since it is limited nowadays by responsibilities. I'm imagining the content will be based on my experience as a developer, and would be mostly screencasts of me coding and providing some examples. The best strategy for me will be to focus on curating the right content. I'm thinking small 15-20 minute sessions, focused on a small example.

As always, the door is open to ideas for topics. I've had a few comments and questions on my Disquis board, and I've thoroughly enjoyed responding to those. Thank you to those who have participated in my blog or have just stopped by to take a glance.
